THE STORY OF BEOWULF

I

The Prelude


Now we have heard, by inquiry, of the glory of the kings of the
people, they of the Spear-Danes, how the Athelings were doing deeds
of courage. [3] Full often Scyld, the son of Scef, with troops of
warriors, withheld the drinking-stools from many a tribe. This
earl caused terror when at first he was found in a miserable
case. Afterwards he gave help when he grew up under the welkin,
and worshipfully he flourished until all his neighbours over the sea
gave him obedience, and yielded him tribute. He was a good king. In
after-time there was born to him a son in the Court, whom God sent
thither as a saviour of the people. He saw the dire distress that
they formerly suffered when for a long while they were without a
prince. Then it was that the Lord of Life, the Wielder of glory,
gave to him glory. Famous was Beowulf. [4] Far and wide spread his
fame. Heir was he of Scyld in the land of the Danes. Thus should
a young man be doing good deeds, with rich gifts to the friends of
his father, so that in later days, when war shall come upon them,
boon companions may stand at his side, helping their liege lord. For
in all nations, by praiseworthy deeds, shall a man be thriving.

At the fated hour Scyld passed away, very vigorous in spirit, to the
keeping of his Lord. Then his pleasant companions carried him down to
the ocean flood, as he himself had bidden them, whilst the friend of
the Scyldings was wielding words, he who as the dear Lord of the Land
had ruled it a long time. And there, in the haven, stood the ship,
with rings at the prow, icy, and eager for the journey, the ferry of
the Atheling.

Then they laid down their dear Lord the giver of rings, the famous
man, on the bosom of the ship, close to the mast, where were heaps of
treasures, armour trappings that had been brought from far ways. Never
heard I of a comelier ship, decked out with battle-weapons and
weeds of war, with swords and byrnies. In his bosom they laid many
a treasure when he was going on a far journey, into the power of
the sea. Nor did they provide for him less of booty and of national
treasures than they had done, who at the first had sent him forth,
all alone o'er the waves, when he was but a child. Then moreover they
set a golden standard high o'er his head, and let the sea take him,
and gave all to the man of the sea. Full sad were their minds, and all
sorrowing were they. No man can say soothly, no, not any hall-ruler,
nor hero under heaven, who took in that lading. [5]









II

The Story


I

Moreover the Danish Beowulf, [6] the dear King of his people, was
a long time renowned amongst the folk in the cities (his father,
the Prince, had gone a-faring elsewhere from this world). Then was
there born to him a son, the high Healfdene; and while he lived he
was ruling the happy Danish people, and war-fierce and ancient was
he. Four children were born to him: Heorogar the leader of troops, and
Hrothgar, and Halga the good. And I heard say that Queen Elan (wife
of Ongentheow) was his daughter, and she became the beloved comrade
of the Swede. Then to Hrothgar was granted good speed in warfare and
honour in fighting, so that his loyal subjects eagerly obeyed him,
until the youths grew doughty, a very great band of warriors. Then
it burned in his mind that he would bid men be building a palace,
a greater mead-hall than the children of men ever had heard of, and
that he would therein distribute to young and to old, as God gave him
power, all the wealth that he had save the share of the folk and the
lives of men.

Then I heard far and wide how he gave commandment to many a people
throughout all the world, this work to be doing, and to deck out
the folkstead. In due time it happened that soon among men, this
greatest of halls was now all ready. And Hart he called it, whose
word had great wielding. He broke not his promise, but gave to them
rings and treasures at the banquet. The hall towered on high, and the
gables were wide between the horns, [7] and awaited the surging of the
loathsome flames. Not long time should pass ere hatred was awakened
after the battle-slaughter, twixt father-in-law and son-in-law. [8]

Then it was that the powerful sprite who abode in darkness, scarce
could brook for a while that daily he heard loud joy in the hall. There
was sound of harping, and the clear song of the bard.

He who knew it was telling of the beginning of mankind, and he
said that the Almighty created the world, and the bright fields
surrounded by water. And, exulting, He set the sun and the moon as
lamps to shine upon the earth-dwellers, and adorned the world with
branches and leaves. And life He was giving to every kind of living
creature. So noble men lived in joy, and were all blessed till one
began to do evil, a devil from hell; and this grim spirit was called
Grendel. And he was a march-stepper, who ruled on the moorlands, the
fens, and the stronghold. For a while he kept guard, this unhappy
creature, over the land of the race of monsters, since the Creator
had proscribed him. On the race of Cain the Eternal Lord brought
death as vengeance, when he slew Abel. Nor did he find joy in the
feud, but God for the crime drove him far thence. Thus it was that
evil things came to their birth, giants and elves and monsters of
the deep, likewise those giants who for a long while were striving
with God Himself. And well He requited them.




II

Then he went visiting the high house after nightfall, to see how the
Ring-Danes were holding it. And he found there a band of Athelings
asleep after feasting. And they knew not sorrow or the misery of
men. The grim and greedy wight of destruction, all fierce and furious,
was soon ready for his task, and laid hold of thirty thanes, all as
they lay sleeping. And away he wended, faring homeward and exulting
in the booty, to revisit his dwellings filled full of slaughter. At
the dawn of day the war-craft of Grendel was seen by men. Then after
his feeding they set up a weeping, great noise in the morning.

The glorious Lord, the very good Atheling, sat all unblithely, and
suffered great pain, and endured sorrow for his thanes, when they saw
the track of the loathly one, the cursed sprite. That struggle was
too strong, loathsome and long. And after but one night (no longer
time was it) he did them more murder-bale, and recked not a whit
the feud and the crime. Too quick was he therein. Then he who had
sought elsewhere more at large a resting-place, a bed after bower,
was easily found when he was shown and told most truly, by the token
so clear, the hate of the hell-thane. He went away farther and faster,
he who would escape the fiend. So he ruled and strove against right,
he alone against all of them, until the best of houses stood quite
idle. And a great while it was--the friend of the Danes suffered
distress and sorrows that were great the time of twelve winters.

Then was it made known to the children of men by a sorrowful singing
that Grendel was striving this while against Hrothgar, and waged
hateful enmity of crime and feud for many a year with lasting strife,
and would hold no truce against any man of the main host of Danes,
nor put away the life-bale, or settle feud with a fee, nor did any man
need to hope for brighter bettering at the hand of the banesman. The
terrible monster, a dark death-shadow, was pursuing the youth and
the warriors, and he fettered and ensnared them, and ever was holding
night after night the misty moorlands. And, men know not ever whither
workers of hell-runes wander to and fro. Thus the foe of mankind,
the terrible and lonesome traveller, often he did them even greater
despite. And he took up his dwelling in the treasure-decked Hall of
Hart in the dark night, nor could he come near the throne the treasure
of God, nor did he know His love. [9]

And great was the evil to the friend of the Danes, and breakings of
heart. Many a strong one sat in council, and much they discussed what
was best for stout-hearted men to do against the fearful terror. And
sometimes they went vowing at their heathen shrines and offered
sacrifices, and with many words pleaded that the devil himself would
give them his help against this menace to the nation. For such was
their custom, the hope of the heathen. And ever of Hell they thought
in their hearts; the Creator they knew not, the Judge of all deeds,
nor knew they the Lord God, nor could they worship the Protector of
the heavens, the Wielder of glory. Woe be to that man who shall shove
down a soul through hurtful malice into the bosom of the fire, and
who hopes for no help nor for any change--well shall it be with that
one who after his death day shall seek the Lord and desire protection
in the embrace of the Father.




III

So Beowulf, son of Healfdene, ever was brooding over this time-care,
nor could the brave hero avert woe. That conflict was too strong,
loathsome and long, that terrible and dire distress, the greatest of
night-bales which came to the people.

Then the thane of Hygelac, [10] the good man of the Geats, [11]
heard from home of the deeds of Grendel. And on the day of this life
he was the strongest of main of all men in the world; noble was he
and powerful. He bade a fair ship be made, and said that he would be
seeking the War-King, the famous prince, over the swan path, and that
he needed men. And the proud churls little blamed him for that journey,
though dear he was to them. They urged on the valiant man and marked
the omen. The good man of the Geats had chosen champions of those
who were keenest, and sought out the ship. And one, a sea-crafty
man, pointed to the land-marks. Time passed by; the ship was on
the waves, the boat under the cliff, and the warriors all readily
went up to the stern. And the currents were swirling, with sea and
sand. And men were carrying on to the naked deck bright ornaments
and splendid war-armour. Then they shove forth the ship that was well
bound together; and it set forth over the waves, driven by the wind,
this foamy-necked ship, likest to a bird; until about the same time
on the next day, the ship with its twisted stern had gone so far that
the sailing men could see the land, the shining sea-cliffs, the steep
mountains, and the wide sea-nesses. Then they crossed the remaining
portion of the sea. [12] The Geats went up quickly on to the shore,
and anchored the ship. War-shirts and war-weeds were rattling. And
they gave God thanks for their easy crossing of the waves. Then the
ward of the Swedes, who kept guard over the sea-cliffs, saw them carry
down the gangways the bright shields and armour, all ready. And full
curious thought tortured him as to who these men were. He, the thane
of Hrothgar, rode down to the beach on his charger, and powerfully
brandished the spear in his hand and took counsel with them.

'Who are ye armour-bearers, protected by byrnies, who come here thus
bringing the high vessel over the sea, and the ringed ship over the
ocean? I am he that sits at the end of the land and keep sea-guard,
so that no one more loathsome may scathe with ship-army the land of
the Danes. Never have shield-bearers begun to come here more openly,
yet ye seem not to know the password of warriors, the compact of
kinsmen. Nor ever have I seen a greater earl upon earth, than one of
your band, a warrior in armour. And except his face belie him, he that
is thus weapon-bedecked is no hall-man; but a peerless one to see. Now
must I know your lineage before you go farther with your false spies
in the land of the Danes. Now O ye far-dwellers and sea-farers, hear
my onefold thought--haste is best in making known whence ye are come.'